Marc Auge - Non-places 
(Non-lieux: introduction à une anthropologie de la surmodernité)

He was enjoying the feeling of freedom imparted by having got rid of his luggage and at the same time, more intimately, by the certainty that, now that he was 'sorted out', his identity registered, his boarding pass in his pocket, he had nothing to do but wait for the sequence of events.

it was in these crowded places where thousands of individual itineraries converged for a moment, unaware of one another, that there survived something of the uncertain charm of the waste lands, the yards and building sites, the station platforms and waiting rooms where travellers break step, of all the chance meeting places where fugitive feelings occur of the possibility of continuing adventure, the feeling that ail there is to do is to 'see what happens'.

(SPATIAL OVERABUNDANCE)

Place is stability.

"Premodern figures of continuous temporality"

If a place can be defined as relational, historical and concerned with identity, then a space which cannot be defined as relational, or historical, or concerned with identity will be a non-place.

The hypothesis advanced here is that super-modernity produces non-places. meaning spaces which are not themselves anthropological places and which. unlike Baudelairean modernity, do not integrate the earlier places: instead these are listed, classified, promoted to the status of 'places of memory', and assigned to a circumscribed and specific position.

A world thus surrendered to solitary individuality, to the fleeting, the temporary and ephemeral

But non-places are the real measure of our time ; one that could be quantified - with the aid of a few conversions between area, volume and distance - by totalling all the air, rail and motorway routes , the mobile cabins called 'means of transport' (aircraft, trains and road vehicles) , the airports and railway stations, hotel chains, leisure parks, large retail outlets, and finally the complex skein of cable and wireless networks that mobilise extraterrestrial space for the purposes of a communication so peculiar that it often puts the individual in contact only with another image of himself.

To frequent space, Michel de Certeau writes, is 'to repeat the gleeful and silent experience of infancy: to be other, and go over to the other, in a place'.

Discontinuity between the spectator-traveller and the space of the landscape he is contemplating or rushing through. This prevents him from perceiving it as a place, from being fully present in it.

The traveller's space may thus be the archetype of non-place.

'Loss of the subject among the crowd - or, inversely, absolute power, claimed by the individual consciousness.'

The word 'non-place' designates two complementary but distinct realities : spaces formed in relation to certain ends (transport, transit, commerce, leisure) , and the relations that individuals have with these spaces.

As anthropological places create the organically social, so non-places create solitary contractuality.


banal utopias, cliches


But the real non-places of super-modernity - the ones we inhabit when we are driving down the motorway, wandering through the supermarket or sitting in an airport lounge waiting for the next flight to London or Marseille - have the peculiarity that they are defined partly by the words and texts they offer us: their 'instructions for use ' , which may be prescriptive ('Take right-hand lane'), prohibitive (‘No smoking') or informative ('You are now entering the Beaujolais region'). Sometimes these are couched in more or less explicit and codified ideograms (on road signs, maps and tourist guides), sometimes in ordinary language. This establishes the traffic conditions of spaces in which individuals are supposed to interact only with texts, whose proponents are not individuals but 'moral entities' or institutions (airports, airlines, Ministry of Transport, commercial companies ,traffic police, municipal councils) ; sometimes their presence is explicitly stated ('this road section financed by the General Council'), sometimes it is only vaguely discernible behind the injunctions, advice, commentaries and 'messages' transmitted by the innumerable 'supports' (signboards, screens, posters) that form an integral part of the contemporary landscape. 

The fact is that most of those who pass by do not stop; but they may pass by again, every summer or several times a year, so that an abstract space, one they have regular occasion to read rather than see, can become strangely familiar to them over time.

Another example of the invasion of space by text is the big supermarket. The customer wanders around in silence, reads labels, weighs fruit and vegetables on a machine that gives the price along with the weight; then hands his credit card to a young woman as silent as himself - anyway, not very chatty - who runs each article past the sensor of a decoding machine before checking the validity of the customer's credit card.

All the remarks that emanate from our roads and commercial centres, from the street corner sites of the vanguard of the banking system (‘Thank you for your custom','Bon voyage', 'We apologize for any inconvenience') are addressed simultaneously and indiscriminately to each and any of us.

The user of a non-place is in contractual relation with it (or with the powers that govern it). He is reminded, when necessary, that the contract exists. One element of this is when the non-place has to be used; the ticket he has bought, the card he will have to show at the tollbooth, even the trolley he trundles round the supermarket; are all more or less clear signs of it.

Different requirements to be present in an area, and checks to monitor fulfilment. Words hardly count any longer. There will be no individualization (no right to anonymity) without identity checks.

What he is confronted with, finally, is an image of himself, but in truth it is a pretty strange image. The only face to be seen, the only voice to be heard, in the silent dialogue he holds with the landscape-text addressed to him along with others, ishis own. 

The space of non-place creates neither singular identity nor relations; only solitude and similitude. What reigns there is actuality, the urgency of the present moment.

Everything proceeds as if space had been trapped by time, as if there were no history other than the last forty-eight hours of news, as if each individual history were drawing its motives, its words and images, from the inexhaustible stock of an unending history in the present.

A paradox of non-place: a foreigner lost in a country he does not know (a 'passing stranger') can feel at home there, only in the anonymity of motorways, service stations, big stores or hotel chains.

The non-place is the opposite of utopia: it exists, and it does not contain any organic society.
